It would be on C-SPAN 2 on Book TV this Saturday at 5 p.m.
5 p.m., 9.45, and then 12.45.
This Saturday.
What time again?
5.
Before I get to that tape.
5 p.m.
9.45, and 12.45.
It was about an hour-long show.
Excellent.
But no, I mean, I think, I feel good about the future of the history, the future of the book.
I mean, I think the greatest threat, as you'll hear me say there, and if you've seen some of my other pieces, you will see me say elsewhere, you know, the greatest threat to the rare book world is shortage of supply and scarcity material.
Do you think the collective is,
becoming more knowledgeable?
Or do you think that there is a high spot mentality?
I think there's a lot of high spot mentality.
I don't think it's universal.
And this is something I talk about in this talk, but I think that there's a lot of high spot mentality.
I think that what I see more often are people who are very, very busy,
They're people who've made a lot of money.
They're very smart people.
They're very cultured people.
But they have very little time to devote to it.
They're trying to make, they want to form serious collections, but they want to do it without spending time on it.
And I think that inevitably leads itself to high spot thinking.
Because they have this idea that they want to collect books.
They want to collect important books.
But they're incredibly busy.
And they're not going to spend the time they need to spend to get a real grasp of the topic.
I think that's what's happening more than just, you know, somebody saying, well, you know, I just want to collect a list or something like that.
Well, is part of your job educational then?
Yeah, it certainly is.
I mean, I'm certainly trying to persuade people that there's a broader spectrum and there's great interest in a broader spectrum and that the greatest pleasure in collecting is
forming a context and putting together a group of books that interrelate with each other and reflect on each other and that make a sum that's greater than the parts.
But some people are much more open to that than others.
As I said, some people want advice and other people don't want advice.
Some people want advice
And other people just want you to do what they tell them.
And if you're a business person selling something, and somebody doesn't want to hear it, they want to buy that book, but they're not really interested in what you have to say, well, there you go.
I mean, the books are for sale.
I've dealt with one
customer who would ask me, I'd do a catalog, he'd say, what should I be interested in here?
And I'd mark what I, you know, I'd give it some real thought and mark what I thought he ought to be interested in.
He'd never buy anything that I said he ought to be interested in.
He assumed it was a trap.
He'd go through and pick out things that I hadn't said.
Well, of course, once I got the hang of that, I just started telling him, you know, to be interested in things.
But you never buy anything that I suggested.
So, you know, again, like any form of discretionary spending, the book business is always going to deal with issues of ego and, you know, people are doing things for a whole variety of reasons.
And, you know, for a lot of people, there's no question that the fun of acquiring stuff
is they happen to be acquiring.
This is why the auction houses do well.
I mean, the auction houses have made it fun to go out and compete for this stuff.
And the auction houses become real forums for ego.
I mean, I certainly see this.
There are other people I can think of where if they come in person,
You know, it's going to be damn the torpedoes.
You know, they're going to go after it.
And they're going to, you know, get it because their manhood's on the line.
But if they give a bid to somebody, they're going to be much more conservative.
Because at that point, you know, if your agent gets outbid, well, nobody really knows if he was bidding for you.
You know, it's like... I tell the story in this piece I did on Abel Berlin.
My greatest example of that was Dick Manny at the garden sale.
Was he bidding against...
Well, Jim was bidding for Dick.
And Dick was bidding against Jim?
Well, no, Dick started bidding.
Jim got to the point on the Shakespeare's that Dick had told him to go to.
And Jim properly stopped.
And then Manny, Dick stepped in himself.
I was sitting right next to him.
I mean, I was sitting next to Jim.
Dick was sitting right behind us.
And, you know,
Jim was absolutely horrified.
You know, what are you doing?
You know, and then he started bidding, and then we got to that great—were you there?
I was there, yeah.
Yeah, and you remember Marion leaning over and saying, come on, what's under the dust?
No, it's in my book.
What he said was, he paused and he said, think about it.
Yeah, it was the best piece of—best single moment of auctioneering I've ever seen.
That man was a master.
And I happened, and it was just pure coincidence.
It wasn't coincidence.
You talk about serendipity.
John Marion wrote a silly little book, you know, about auctioneering.
And usually the authors I had to have several cuts above that.
But I jumped at the opportunity to go do an interview with him when he came to Boston, just specifically to get to ask him
What the hell were you thinking about?
What happened there?
And all of a sudden he looked at me with some, you know, all of a sudden there was respect in his eyes.
He thought I was just some reporter coming in from Worcester doing a, you know, when actually my motive was to talk to him about Hayward O'Moore and Dick Manny.
And you can see all of a sudden all the defenses going up.
But it's in that last shot.
I've never done a great arc near than John.
I think it's because, I mean, he exemplified everything you could do with an auction.
He was so, you'd watch that man take a sale, he would get so totally into the flow of the action, the rhythm of who was... Hi, do you have the keys to the band?
Yes, I do.
Hold on one sec.
Anyway, he would get himself, and he really did it that evening, so totally into the flow of what was going on in the room, the feeling in the room, who the players were, and how to deal with the players, you know, which, you know, the professionals, and of course he had a great memory there of the people who'd been around for a while, you know, he knew who the players were.
You know, the people that you could deal with efficiently that
you know, the booksellers who, you know, when they stopped, you knew what they were doing and you knew what they were up to.
And then playing something like that.
And then the subtext there, though, however, is that, which we found out later and which I have in that chapter, is that he'd already secured a very substantial line of credit from self-abuse.
Marion knew this.
I mean, he owed them a million dollars on those Shakespeare's.
Oh, of course.
Oh, I knew that.
But I mean,
Marion certainly knew, but, you know, why not?
I mean, we've already told them we'll give them the money for it.
I think that's what's kind of... Oh, there was no concern about that.
I mean, you know, Dick was exactly the kind of buyer they were looking for.
He was paying, he owed them for all kinds of things.
He owed them for Andy Warhol cookie jars.
He owed them for rugs.
He owed them for bad paintings.
And a man seldom existed to wear stays and things.
He doesn't have to be revisiting the money.
No, they were happy to give him the credit.
The question was, could he get another $100,000 bid out of him?
There are some sales, the Siebert sale did this a little bit, where it gets going, and of course this is what every auctioneer wants.
There's the feeling that this is the new paradigm.
And the sale that I was at that had that the most was the first SANG sale, the Phillips SANG autograph sales.
That was in 78, I guess.
And that sale started off, and Marion was taking the sale.
And the first lot went for three times what everybody thought it would go for.
The second lot went for the same.
And Marion didn't kind of slow down.
to make it easier for all these bids to come.
Marion, he speeded it up.
And it became this, it just started to, you know, it was like a whirlwind.
He was going faster and faster.
And everybody's sitting there thinking, you know, there's just started to be this feeling like the train is leaving the station, and if I don't step on board right now, I'm done for, you know.
And...
people started going, oh, shit, you know, I mean, this is it.
You know, I mean, I bet if I buy these things, I mean, what's going to happen tomorrow?
Everybody's going to see these prices, and, you know, I'll never be able to buy another thing again.
And it was just incredible, just amazing.
You know, in fact, when I go back now and I think, there's always some, I met my new editor yesterday, HarperCollins.
They're buying my, they're taking my book.
So we had lunch yesterday.
And he says to me, well, where do you get these stories?
Where do you hear about these things?
I said, well, you know, you'd be surprised.
I mean, you have to go out.
You can't stay at home.
You can't talk on the telephone.
We're back on again.
Which is that in terms of sense of profession, I think, you know, one of the things the European tradition I see is not just a tradition of scholarship, but a continuity of knowledge.
And the big old European firms, and a person like Barney is the foremost example of this, were the beneficiaries not only of that tradition of scholarship, but literally growing up in the material, and of learning things from the people who preceded them in the business.
And in that sense, I feel in my career, I've been particularly fortunate, extremely fortunate, and only people besides me
have more of this from people like Rusty Mott, say, who were born into the business and are second generation.
Say again, who was that person?
Rusty Mott.
He was Father Howard, Howard Billismott, Howard Mott.
But I really had a great opportunity because I got into this business when I was quite young.
And because of the people I knew and the contacts I had quite young,
that I got to know a lot of the people who were my predecessors.
Michael Walsh, Fickett Speeds, Lindley Eberstadt, Peter Decker, you know, some other less well-known people who were people who's experienced, or Warren Howell, for that matter, who I was very friendly with and did a lot of business with.
You know, people's experience in the book trade went back into the 20s.
I got to know very well whether
I was a young man and really got to know on a personal, friendly basis.
And they, in turn, I'm sorry, Peter Decker had known Wilberforce Eames when he was a young man, and Eames was an old man in the New York public.
And I feel that continuity very much.
You know, that I can go back, you know, somebody I knew, and you're covering 100 years of the antiquarian books in this country.
So...
That's something that I feel very much about my career in the book business is that I've always tried to be in the context of the people that preceded me in the business and to know about them and what they did.
Other than Archie, is there anyone that you would describe as a mentor?
I mean, did you have any kind of mentor?
My first real mentor in the book business was a guy named Jeff Dykes.
who isn't that well-known, but he was on my Americanist alphabet there.
Jeff was a great collector of Western Americana.
His real career was in the Soil Conservation Service.
At one point, he was the head of field operations in the Soil Conservation Service.
Which conservation?
The Soil Conservation Service.
How do you spell it?
S-O-I-L.
Okay.
Oh, Soil.
You have to understand when I'm transcribing this, if I don't get it right, it's hard.
You're forever working on it.
But, I mean, Jeff was a guy who was born in West Texas in 1900, grew up in Texas, started collecting books when he was a high school principal in West Texas in the 1920s.
And then put together an incredible collection because his job basically was driving around the country checking on all these field offices.
So he had reason to be in every town and every place.
And at that point, you could still buy a tremendous number of books going in places as you went around.
So he managed to work in a lot of bookstores along the way.
And when he retired at age 65 in 1965, he went into the book business.
and was active early until about 1980.
Where was he located?
In College Park, Maryland.
At that point, he moved to Washington when he got high enough up in the federal bureaucracy.
So, I saw a lot of him when I was in high school, and as soon as I had a driver's license.
So you had actually put him in the mentor category?
Oh, absolutely.
My book on folks in the cattle industry is dedicated to him.
It's my first book, and very much so.
How many books, to your credit?
Well, you know, it depends what you call a book.
I mean, really— Well, I mean, things have been written and been published.
Six score and this are really the two hard-bound things.
We're issuing catalog 189, so that's about a six-foot shelf.
Wow.
189.
How many a year?
About ten a year.
We'll have 200 next year.
We'll have 200 in 2,000.
I'm going to do a catalog of 20 great things.
It's going to be 20 catalog 200, 20 things in the year 2,000.
And when in 2,000?
Do you figure you'll have that?
Oh, probably about this time next year.
Yeah, next fall.
This is too late to get into this book.
Okay, well, you know what?
I think... Yeah, I want to give you a little... Show me around a little bit.
No, say that again.
Start again if there's an example.
There's an example of what a context of a collection...
this color plate collection is it.
Because the thing that unifies this group of books is that these are books published in America with plates printed in America in color in the 19th century.
That covers a vast range of subject matter from fashion to natural history to view books to medical books to what have you.
When you have them all together here, and they don't take up that much room as you can see,
One, two, three, four, five, six.
Yeah, it's a bad idea.
I got about 700 titles.
I got a closet full of big folios in the other room.
But you can start pulling these books out, looking at different things.
These are arranged chronologically here.
In any big library, these things are going to be scattered through a vast range of things.
Even the most accommodating libraries won't let you check out more than four or five books at a time.
Here, we've got a database set up that's cross-indexed by the people who did the prints, by chronologically, by the places they were printed.
If we want to see what's happening in Philadelphia in a period, we can just pull them all off and look at them.
If we want to look at the work of a specific printer over time, we can pull that off and look at them.
This is a research collection, then.
It's a research collection, and its ability to be a great research collection
depends on it being in one place and all there where you can pull things off the shelf and compare them.
And you simply can't do that.
It's not a fault of the great research libraries.
They can't allow that to happen and protect their collections.
But here, I can't allow it to happen.
So anybody who wanted to work in this field, they could do more here in an afternoon than they could do in a research library in days and days.
and they'd still miss things over there because they can't put all the stuff together in front of them at once.
So that is the advantage that a serious collector might have over an institutional... Absolutely.
Absolutely.
So where do you see the fate of a collection like this?
I suspect it has to remain together as a collection.
Well, I'd certainly like to do... Which lets counter to what a bookseller's mandate is.
Yeah, I mean, in this case, it's a work in progress.
I've been working on this show that was at the Groll Air Club and doing that book.
That show is definitely going to go
In a couple years, it's going to be at the Huntington.
Nice.
It's also going to be at the Carter Museum in Fort Worth and some other stops.
Oh, congratulations.
I'm working on my bigger book on American Colorplate books right now.
So it's been so much a work in progress and a work in collection.
I'm adding to it and doing this show and everything.
I haven't really thought in the long run, what do I do?
But I'd certainly like to try to keep it together somewhere or another.
So where do you do your research for this?
Do you have the materials here?
Do you have to go across the street, or do you go up to MDS?
Well, for some reference material I've got here, the books I've got here, things I don't have I have to go to other libraries, and just about any reference material I have that I don't have here is across the street.
Of course, that's true of everything we do.
It's the great thing about being in the shadow of a major university.
Quite literally, yeah.
Sterling has just about anything you can think of.
And in terms of husbanding your time, is this something that you definitely do for pleasure, or is this—how much of your day would you say— Well, it tends to go in fits and starts.
Rainy Saturday, and I'll spend a rainy Saturday doing it.
But it's something done in your own time as opposed to the bookseller time.
It's very difficult to draw a line between my own time and bookseller time.
I am what I do.
As I said, I read catalogs at home in the evening, but I read them the way that people sit there and read the newspaper.
It's light entertainment as well as being work.
Would you say all of these books
If they were in an institution, pretty much most of them would be in special collections?
Most of them would be, although the price range here, what I paid for these books, ranges from $2.50 to six figures.
But, you know, what you paid is quite irrelevant to the value you've perceived.
Oh, absolutely.
There's no question about that.
And the synergistic quality that it gets by being a collection.
Actually, the book I paid $2.50 for is a very important book.
But...
running my catalogs, by the way, so that's what we're up to right now.
Oh, wow, that's great.
And so what's the $2.50 book?
It's actually the first book printed in the trichromatic halftones, if you look in, is the last book in the exhibition.
And it's one of those cases I bought it because it fit my criteria.
It's an ugly book, and I didn't understand until I started putting the show together, which is, I think, the great value of working with your books.
And it's a great value, the creative mess theory of collecting.
Creative mess?
I like it.
Critical mess, excuse me.
The critical mess, the Zinman critical mess theory.
I simply bought books to fit the context, and then I tried to figure out what they meant, just as the same principle Michael has applied to his collective.
And this was a perfect case.
It was an ugly book, but it fitted the criteria, so I bought it.
And where did you find it for $250?
Oh, God.
Flea Market?
Lord knows.
I don't remember.
So wasn't anything that jumped out at you at the moment?
It's, again, something that you determined after that.
As I researched it, I came to realize that it was this great landmark in history book production.
250.
And lots of people at the show thought it was great.
That's great.
I think the other context of a collection like this is that it does allow—it gets rid of preconceptions.
Instead of going in with a theory and looking at books you know about and saying, well, I'm going to look at this book and this book and this book because they fit my theory, you have the books, and the books force you to look at the books and draw a conclusion the other way around.
Some of the things I thought about color playbooks turned out to be completely wrong, as I kind of was faced with the evidence of the critical mess.
Just to give you the range, then, you said you've gone from $2.50 to six figures.
What would an example of the six-figure be?
And this also is in the catalog, too.
Yeah, this is number one in the catalog.
So, number one and the last item.
Oh, this is the city of Philadelphia.
Philadelphia in the year 1800s.
Oh, that's wonderful.
So this was not something you found at a flea market.
No.
As a matter of fact, this copy belonged to Nick Wainwright, Nicholas Wainwright, who was the great expert on early Philadelphia.
That's the illustration that's in the book, I think.
Yeah, that's one in the book.
There are a number of other things.
There are the Indians being shown around Philadelphia.
This is a book that's constantly used for illustrations by all kinds of modern historical things, because it's the best group of pictures there is.
Now this belonged at one point to Nick Wainwright who did Philadelphia and the Romantic Ancient Lithography, so this is a copy that's been in the hands of people who knew exactly what this book was for some time.
And how long have you had that?
So that is a major acquisition when it comes— Yeah.
You feel terrific when you get there, right?
Well, I don't know that I feel any more terrific, actually, than I do about some of the others.
This is what I've had probably the longest here.
This is one of the proof plates for the Audubon quadrupeds.
Wow.
So this is before Lenners.
Audubon took this with him on his last expedition.
He'd just gotten the proofs of the first fifteen plates.
And what does that say there?
Actually, that says, inscribed to James Henry Carlton of the U.S.
Dragoons, October 9, 1843, by his friend and servant, John James Audubon.
Carlton was a young army lieutenant who took him buffalo hunting at Fort Union there from Missouri, and he gave this to him as a thank you present.
And describe the content of the picture.
This is the American Chipmunks, which is plate eight.
Downstairs I have plate one, which is American Wildcat, that has a similar inscription.
And then Carlton gave it to one of his sisters, which is that inscription there.
So it's got great associates.
I bought these from Kenny Newman at the old print shop in 1971.
They're worth a lot more than what I think for them.
I would think so.
But there are things that are gems to me.
Because you develop a context, you start to realize what some of these things are.
That's the essence of a collection, isn't it?
I have here one of the most remarkable things, and this is something I knew about.
Because of working on that show at the Yale Library, the Illustrating Traveler show, I worked quite a bit with the books from the Abbey collection that Paul Mellon gave to the British Art Center.
And there were some remarkable books in Abbey.
And there was a case where, you know, I spent a couple days over there just looking at Abbey books.
So you see all these books that hardly ever come up.
In the context of this, this is a book by a man named Jan Bellisario called Sketches of Character in Illustration of the Habits and Occupation and Costume of the Negro Population on the Island of Jamaica.
Is that I-M or J-M?
Looks like an I. I-M, yes.
B-E-L-I-S-A-R-I-O.
And this is published in Kingston, Jamaica in 1837.
Now, it's hard enough to find Jamaican prints in that period, but this is right after Emancipation.
And all the illustrations are lithographed in Kingston, and they show Mardi Gras costumes in Kingston.
I mean, there are about four known copies of this thing.
These are all hand-colored.
All hand-colored, yeah, hand-colored lithographs.
I saw this.
So this is a case of, you know, educated serendipity.
You know, I'd seen this thing.
I'd seen the melon coffee.
I'd exhibited it.
And, you know, one day, actually last summer.
This is not in the catalog, is it?
No, it's not in the catalog.
I got this too late to get in the show.
Otherwise, I would have put it in the show.
I would have put it in the show otherwise.
But in this case.
I didn't see it there.
No, no, it's not there.
I was in London, and one of my colleagues said to me, say, have you ever heard of a thing by a guy named Bellisario?
And I said, oh, sure, you mean the Jamaica thing?
And he looked very deflated.
And he said, oh, you know about it?
And I said casually, oh, sure, of course I know about it.
Yeah, Bellisario.
You know, it's the thing that's a Mardi Gras picture, it's done in Kingston.
And he said, God, I thought it was incredibly rare.
And I said, oh, I guess it must be scarce, but, you know, of course I know about it.
And he said, well, you know, are you interested?
And I said, oh, sure, you know, I'd buy it.
But I think there's no question that I got a better price, because I don't think he figured out what he wanted to ask yet.
And I think when it turned out that I knew all about it, instead of it being, you know, something...
So what was going on inside while he was telling you this?
Well, I do these things almost automatically.
But anyway, I'm very, very pleased with that.
And I knew exactly what it was, but the thought that I'd get to buy one was very far from my mind.
Educated serendipity.
Educated serendipity, exactly.
This is, well, a lot of my Melville stuff is up at my house, but I've got some of my other bits and pieces of collections.
Had you been reading Melville for pleasure, or was this just... Well, that's really why I started collecting Melville, because I decided to read Melville from beginning to end, and so I started at Type-P and I chronologically.
I didn't start collecting it, actually, until I read it all.
But after I'd read it all, then I started collecting.
And for a while I collected.
after Harry D. Smith at the library.
I guess, books, association books that I liked, and association books that had interest to me.
So, for example, I always like to put Terry Sutherland's The Magic Christian, which I have the manuscript of now.
I have a great collection of Robert Byron, the American, the English travel writer.
B-Y-R-O-N.
And I collected for a while.
I had a lot of little literary collections.
Bill, you've been very generous with your time.
Oh, you're not done with the tour.
You're going to see it all.
That's fine.
I just feel guilty to you.
This is the folio part of the tour.
This is, of course, where they tend to be the most expensive of the color plate.
Is that an elephant folio size?
Yeah, that is elephant folio, actually.
The big Audubon is double elephant folio.
That's a set of the quads, the folio quads, which is called imperial folio.
But that would be elephant folio, and the big one's double elephant folio.
What's that Moby Dick box over there?
That's the original box for the Rockwell Camp Moby Dick.
Wow.
You have my attention on that one.
The blocks.
Yeah, it's the proofs.
It's the proofs of all illustrations.
That's pretty good.
Yeah.
Congratulations.
Yeah, that's, you know, the greatest illustrations that the movie did.
And then this goes into the other building here.
So this is more reference books in a variety of areas.
And this is...
They're counting and more reference books.
I've put up a lot of visiting booksellers who are going through here.
This is the bibliographical suite.
We call this the bibliographical suite.
What we're looking at is about a twin mattress on the floor.
What do you call it, a what?
A futon, you know, like a Japanese futon.
Oh, okay, sure.
The one over there is the color plate suite.
You can ask Jim Cummins.
Jim Cummins has been a guest many times.
This is another area I've collected quite a bit, which is association bibliographies, for example.
This is Henry Harese's Biblioteca Americana Vistissimo, which is the first great American bibliography.
It's extraordinarily important, yeah.
Yeah.
And this is John Russell Bartlett's copy, who was— That's a double whammy.
Yeah, who was, of course, John Carter Brown's first librarian.
And then here are all the letters from Harese to Bartlett are laid in the front.
Now, are you tempted to sign your name into something like this?
I mean, you could.
I could, and I probably will in some form.
I mean, I've never gotten a book plate.
I would think for this collection it would really be appropriate, wouldn't you think?
Yeah.
I think of any of the collections I've borne, probably.
And how many volumes approximately would you say this number is?
Oh, gosh, there's a ton of stuff here.
There's a lot of stuff at the warehouse.
There's a lot of ephemeral material, you know, of catalogs and things like that.
So it probably—I mean, for example, a lot of it is material like this.
These are a series of important auction catalogs, like the Alfred T. White sale.
This is actually the sale out of Eversau's stock.
All of these belong to Lathrop Harper, who's, of course, one of the great Americana booksellers.
And all these are Harper's copies marked up at the sale.
So there's a real, you know, I bought from Steve when he broke up the Papantonio reference books.
I bought a ton of that stuff, and a lot of that's down in my office.
So at Papantonio, Seven Gables had gotten George D. Smith's stuff.
So for example, something like Dupuis, the guy who did the Indian 3D catalog.
Dupuis's sale in 1920 was the biggest sale of that.
Well, I've got the Papantonio George D. Smith copy.
I got it all marked up with George D. Smith's bids for Huntington.
what George D. Smith bought, what he didn't buy.
Your book plate should really go in there.
I mean, that is a tinker to evers to chance kind of a... And so, I mean, this stuff mixes, you know, it mixes an interest in the background of these things with real applications.
I mean, when we got to Siebert, we had the biggest bunch of Indian treaties in one place since the Edgar sale, or the Dupuis sale in 1920.
I've got George D. Smith's marked copies of those sales.
You can see what they're going on then.
That's something I can
working with my customers, I can give them that kind of context.
I can say, well, look, here's this one and that one.
It went for twice as much, the last time the two of them were up together.
I mean, it means something.
This is one I'm always very pleased with.
This is one of Everstott's greatest catalogs in the Northwest Coast.
Personal Narratives of Discovery, Conquest, and Exploration to the Eberstadt and Sons.
Right.
This came out in 39 or so.
It's a beautiful catalog.
Read that inscription.
Why don't you read it?
I'd like it in your voice.
It says, To Dr. Lathrop C. Harper, my friend, and so proved these three decades and more sincerely, Edward Eberstadt.
June 14, 1941.
Yeah.
And then what does this say?
It says, Bring only discovery.
Discovered or something?
Discovered or something.
Discovered a coast.
Bering only discovered a coast.
Oh.
But I found a good friend, Ed.
Isn't that great?
That's wonderful, isn't it?
Yeah.
Let's see if we can find any others that are— These are Bartlett's copies of the Brown catalog.
Explain for my tape recorder the significance of Bartlett.
John Russell Bartlett was actually the first rare book dealer to specialize in Americana.
He was then John Carter Brown's librarian, prepared on the John Carter Brown catalog, and he was in many ways the most significant figure in nineteenth-century American bibliography.
And so those are his copies of the catalogs he prepared.
Of the Brown catalogs.
I'm amazed that J.C.
Brown doesn't have those.
Well, we've got Brown's copies of the Brown catalogs.
One of the greatest bibliographers of that period was E.C.
Calseca.
Wow, look at that.
He was the bibliographer of early Mexican immigrants.
That's gorgeous.
So there's the Bibliographia Mexicana.
of the 18th century.
And this is Thomas W. Streeter's copy in Streeter's typical handwriting.
And let's see.
I'll excavate a little bit here.
Well, in another vein over there, if you look at that run right there, that's White House's set.
White, W-R-A-G-H-T, House, H-O-W-E-S.
So Wright-House, as you probably know, did U.S.E.I., which is the primary bibliography of kind of nineteenth-century America.
It's certainly the most usable single bibliography.
And here is the first draft of it in manuscript down in the back.
And Howes was famous for always traveling with his little black books that he'd note down bibliographical details in.
Those were turned into U.S.iana, and here are the little black books.
Now where did you get this stuff?
This all was dispersed when Hal's died and went to Southern Book Scout.
But this is the working material for U.S.iana, and Hal always carried these with him.
Book Scouts are pretty good, aren't they?
When this tapes off, I'll tell you what I just got from a Midwestern Book Scout.
Then, you know, after Streeter died, all the stuff that was
of sub-importance, not worth putting in sale, was divided between Eversus and Goodspeeds.
Goodspeeds got most of the bibliographies.
And I bought from them, this was back in the late 70s, Streeter's runs of most booksellers' catalogs that he had.
So this is like his Henry Stevens run.
All these are marked up by Streeter, with what he had, what he was thinking of ordering, what he was interested in.
That run of the month of Goodspeeds is Streeter's run, so it's annotated throughout by Streeter, with what's of interest to him, and stuff like that.
Do you get worthwhile information out of the annotations?
Oh yeah, absolutely, absolutely.
I mean, often in terms of provenance, you know, in a lot of these books there are not a lot of copies of them, and if you know where they went,
You know, when I first got to be friends with Siebert, in fact, one of the ways that I kind of established my bona fides with Siebert, who had a pretty high level of what he expected, was it was a very rare book, which there were like eight, nine copies.
And the last copy had gone through the Eberstadt's hands in 1958.
And I had the annotated catalog that had marked that he had it.
I wrote him a letter and said, you know, I've located seven of the eight copies, and I think you have the eight.
And he wrote me back and said, you know, how the hell did you know that?
And I said, oh, well, I just know.
You know, I just guessed.
You know, I'm just a smart guy.
But that's the kind of thing it takes to establish the credibility, I guess, and
This is Streeter's Bibliography of Texas, which of course is his biggest work, which is dedicated to Henry Wagner, a great bibliographer.
And this is the presentation copy.
And you can read it to Henry Wagner.
To whom is Henry R. Wagner, to whom this is dedicated, comma, with the affectionate regards of his old friend Tom Streeter.
Manchester, New Jersey.
Morristown, New Jersey.
December 30th, 1955.
So this is, and some of these aren't pretty associations.
This is, for example, what's considered the first Americana bibliography there.
catalog of the library of White Kennet, the Biblioteca Americana Primordia, which was done in London in 1713.
1713.
Yeah.
Not much reference value in this, but although I do have in stock downstairs one of White Kennet's copies, this library's broken up.
So I actually have a book that's listed in this catalog in stock.
That's a nice... Yeah, this came from the Ligonian Library, which is merged with the Library Company of Philadelphia.
Well, when Edwin merged them, Edwin Wolff, he disposed of duplicates.
And this was a duplicate, which is where this came from.
With the book, the book plate alone is pretty spectacular.
I'll tell you a great story about Edwin and serendipitous bibliography, which he was certainly the master of.
When the Franklin Institute sold off a lot of their rare books,
Infamously so.
And I was very much a participant in that sale.
I mean, they were going to do it, so I had to be there to buy it.
And it was a ridiculous setup.
It was in the basement of the Franklin Institute.
There were shelves that ran up and down the walls.
It was this one big room.
It was like a shotgun.
It was like 100 yards, 100 feet long, and about 20 feet wide.
And they'd arranged the lops and the shelves, like, let's say, lot one was here, lot two was here, across like that, and then back the other way.
So when you were trying to view the stuff, everybody who was looking this way kept running into everybody who was going that way.
And I'd been down there all day.
It's like about four o'clock.
How long ago was this?
Four or five years ago?
I don't know.
This was back in the 80s.
Okay.
I'd forgotten about it.
Late 80s.
And I do a lex-nex search of it.
And, um...
There was a lot of hoopla at the time.
It was late 80s, I think.
So anyway, I'd been there most of the day, and I was going to spend the evening with my friend Byron School, who you probably met, right?
Right.
Yeah, it's one of my closest friends in the wood business.
Very nice band.
And so I was down on the floor looking at the glass shelf, and there's a set of Moxon's Mechanic Exercises, right, which is a very valuable book in and of itself, and of course famous for its place in the history of printing.
And I was looking at this thing, and I was looking at that thing.
You know, the stand rubbing looks familiar.
And I hadn't quite computed at all, and there was a little nudge in my back, a little nudge in my back, and there's Clarence sitting there.
He said, put that back on the shelf.
And I said, Clarence, I'm looking at this thing, and I'm thinking, he said, shut up, I don't say anything.
And so he said, come on, go outside.
And he said, you saw who that was?
I said, yeah, it's Franklin's Coffee.
And he said, that's right.
He said, Edwin's had his eye on that book for 50 years.
I'm buying it for the library company.
You're not going to touch it.
So I said, okay.
And Edwin had known where that book was for 50 years, and he never told anybody.
Wow.
That's Edwin, though.
Now this was happening.
He was dead by this time, right?
No, this is Edwin still alive.
Because I interviewed him about...
Yeah.
Now this is in the late 80s.
Edwin was retired, but he was still alive.
But he wasn't really retired anyway.
He was still alive.
And so I said, okay, okay.
So Clarence said, well, what do you think it's worth?
Franklin's copy.
You know, Mechanical.
Pick a number.
Yeah, I mean, even then, I mean, we were thinking 50, 60,000 bucks, and now I'd say a quarter million, you know.
Jesus Christ.
Well, I mean, just a set of mechanic exercises now is a $25,000 thing.
I mean, you know, Franklin's going to be annotated.
I was marked off.
I mean, Franklin had, like, written it.
You were actually recognizing the handwriting.
Yeah.
Well, it was one of those things where, you know, I was just sitting there and it was just dawning on me like I couldn't believe it, you know, at the point when he came along.
And so I said, you know, what do you, and he said, well, Edwin, you know, Edwin had plenty of money, you know.
And he said, well, Edwin's going to buy it for the library company.
No matter what it costs, I'm going to buy it.
And so we kind of talked about, well, what could that be?
And, you know, he basically, you know, Edwin had told him to go up for fifty grand.
Well, he got it for nine grand.
to the library company.
This is friendship on your part, let me tell you.
Well, you know, I wasn't going to out.
I couldn't out beat him.
Because he was going to 50 if he had to.
Right.
As far as I know, I mean, Clarence and I were the only people who knew.
Well, somebody knew.
Somebody went to 8,500.
But that's what the book was worth.
I see.
The book was worth 8,500 as the book.
So whoever bid against it was bidding on it purely as the book.
And hadn't made any connection
So how did we know it was Franklin's, just by the handwriting?
Well, he also had marks in books.
I mean, Edwin knew all that stuff.
But Edwin knew it.
Of course, he did the book, Franklin's Library, so he would know.
Exactly.
Come to think of it.
And of course, what Edwin had done a long time ago had been to go through a lot of these big collections, which he could do because he knew the people that let him in the bash, and he could just run the shelves, and he knew what typical bindings of Franklin's.
And bindings was a specialty of his as well.
Yeah, exactly.
But no, of course, there's no way I was going to, I mean, I wouldn't have made the case, but I couldn't have successfully.
That's a great book story.
Well, you haven't even talked about it.
I don't think we have time for it now, but I'm also writing about deaccessions and discards and that NYPL thing, but you were more or less an observer on that whole thing, I think, right?
Well, no, I was fairly happy to be involved.
I mean, it was Zinman and I were the ones who really
I mean, he and I were working together the whole way.
I mean, we jointly came up with the idea of the broadside, and we jointly, you know, called in Singer, who's an old friend of both of ours.
So it was very much mutual.
I mean, the books, we knew about it because some of the books were coming to Michael, but also coming to me.
I mean, the fact that they had resumed doing it, we knew because the Book Scouts were bringing them to me.
And they'd actually made a deal, not an official deal, but a handshake deal with AAS, that if they deaccessioned stuff before 1876, they'd give AAS first shot at having the stuff.
And specifically what they were getting rid of, like, there was this run of Florida Session Laws.
It's the only known complete run of Florida Session Laws in the 1820s, and there's very little Florida surviving printing from that period, because it was all eaten by bugs.
And, I mean, AAS had like one thing in it.
And his book scout shows up at my door, and he's got all these things, and it's been guillotined out of the bindings with the filming slips out, you know, and the data when they were filmed.
And, you know, they'd sold it to him for nothing.
And where did it go?
I mean, does AAS, did they get it finally, or is it—?
I gave it to him.
So you got it and gave it to AAS.
Yeah, I paid the book scout a fair bit of money for it.
But then I called up Ellen, and I said, Ellen, you know,
We're supposed to have a deal with these bozos, you know.
They said they were going to give A.S.
first crack.
Ellen called, and this is, you know, don't say the specific part of it.
Well, let me just tape it for my own, just so I know, so I can hear it, yeah.
But, I mean, basically she called up Bill Walker, who said, oh no, we're not deaccessioning anything.
I mean, I'm sitting here with the stuff in my living room floor, you know, and he's saying, oh no, never let any of it out.
And so Ellen said, well, you know, actually,
I know you have, because one of our trustees, you know, has... Came in possession.
Came in possession of stuff just now.
Oh, it must have been out of the old batch and stuff.
Yeah, it's got things in it filmed.
Walker should know.
And I, you know, we really tried, my client did, to talk to them.
You know, we tried via Ellen talking to them and Ellen getting stonewalled.
And I tried, you know, I wrote LeClerc.
He ignored me.
Why?
And so Michael and I finally just got really fed up.
I mean, it was this—and my context for this, you know, went way back.
I mean, I'd been involved with them with this back in the early 80s, and I'd had this big fight with them when Gregorian was there, because stuff was showing up that had been deaccessioned from them, including things that were unique copies.
They had the only known copy.
And so I called up—actually, I got one in my hands, I looked it up, it's the only known copy.
And I called David Stam.
Can you think of what it might be, the only one?
Yeah, it was a pamphlet relating to the—after the Republic of Texas ended, there was a whole problem about how to absorb the armed forces of Texas into the U.S.
armed forces, what rank people would have, would they continue with their rank, would they be kept at all.
And this was particularly the problem with the Navy.
And the guy who had been Commodore of the Texas Navy was very
you know, pissed off that he wasn't going to get to be a Commodore or whatever.
And he wrote a whole bunch of pamphlets about this.
This is one of those pamphlets.
I bought it at the Litchfield Book Fair.
It's $250.
I bring it back down, I look it up, one copy in it.
I thought it was stolen.
I mean, it had their stamp on it.
It had come from them, clearly.
And it's the only known copy.
I mean, he wouldn't get rid of it.
I called up, I called up David Stan.
So Stan was still at NYPL then?
Yeah, David was still there.
And I called up David, and I said, David, I think I've got something stolen.
and I told them what it was, and it's kind of, well, actually, you know, we deaccessioned that.
It's like, you what?
Well, it turned out they'd taken the whole Ford collection, you know, Worthington, Chauncey, or Paul Lester Ford.
Ford's gave New York Public Library like 100,000 pamphlets.
They're all bound up in volume.
And they took the whole Ford collection and they chopped it out.
And some of it they kept.
Some of it they gave away, which at least put it in libraries that cared about it.
And some of it they discarded.
They sold it for next to nothing.
Did they microfilm it at least?
No, they filmed it all.
They filmed it all.
No, they did film it all.
So we'd had a fight about it back then, and I'd made this big stink about it.
And they were going, oh, you know, they're kind of, at that point they said, well, we're finished anyway.
We've done the program we're going to do.
So, you know, there's nothing else.
Then they wanted me to, this is a longstanding story point, story point between David Stan and Bill Joyce, who was also there, and me.
They wanted me to write them a letter saying they'd explained it all to me, and I understood and approved what they did.
I said, I'm not going to do that.
The military is covering my ass with paper.
Exactly.
That's exactly what they're trying to do.
But it seemed to be the end of it.
Well, then it turned out it wasn't the end of it.
You know, suddenly this stuff's going on again.
And so basically, I mean, we tried to do it through official channels.
And, you know, we had pretty good access.
Over a period of years.
Yeah, well, I thought...
You know, it was all over and done with then.
But, I mean, when it came up again in 97, 98, you know, I knew these guys.
You know, and they were, and Ellen, obviously, was a very close colleague.
Bill Walker, he's just stonewalling her about it.
I mean, so we just got pissed off.
I mean, I just thought, screw it, I don't care.
You know, I mean, I'm not going to, because my whole view was that it's one thing if you're like the, you know,
Bohunk Historical Society or if you're a relatively small college library somewhere, you tailor your collection to what your constituency needs in that case.
That's your obligation.
But if you're a great research library, if you're the Library of Congress or New York Public or Yale or Harvard or Stanford, you're one of the great research libraries in the world, you have an obligation to protect the material you have because only a limited number of repositories have those kinds of resources.
and can have that kind of universal view.
And it's doubly important for those institutions to play their role as these great central repositories.
And to me, the New York Public Library was violating what it was going out.
You know, if you read, they were going out raising hundreds of millions of dollars saying to the people who are giving them the money, we have a universal scope.
You know, we're a great research library.
We're preserving the world's resources.
Well, great, they should.
But they weren't really doing that.
The argument in response, it's not my argument, I just present it, because it feeds into this whole preservation argument.
They would argue, and they would argue, because I've talked to Joyce and Stan on this, and they say, well, you know, there was an argument that by microfilming you're preserving the information, and that in these cases it's the information that matters and not the artifact.
What's your response to that?
Well, my response to that is that there are instances where they're right,
When you get into the era of very friable paper, you get into... They had a bunch of World War I newspapers, for instance.
They were literally falling apart.
They were going to fall apart.
You know, they only hadn't fallen apart.
They might have one turn of the page left.
Yeah, exactly.
And I completely agreed with them on that stuff.
There was no reason, there's every reason to film that stuff, and they were completely right there.
But that was a small fraction of what they were filming.
These early Florida things, for instance,
These were printed on quite good paper.
They were in good physical condition.
Even after being chopped out of the bindings, they were in, you know, perfectly good shape.
And they're damn close to being unique.
Damn close to being unique, exactly.
Their further argument, you know, Paul Leclerc's argument, is that, well, the microfilm is going to allow them to disseminate this material and other places can have it.
I mean, my response to that has always been, fine, microfilm it, but don't get rid of the original.
You don't even have to make the original accessible on a shelf anymore.
Get a warehouse in New Jersey, put it in box $2,555, ship it out there, and if somebody has to see the original, charge them a $50 fee or something for hauling it back in.
But you've still got the original.
Once you film it, then it's all over with.
Once you've thrown it out, it's all over with.
Nobody can go back to the original thing.
Do you know the story of the Italian newspapers?
Nope.
Okay.
This is a good story.
You got enough paper?
Oh, yeah.
Don't worry.
This is the whole other side.
Michael, you know, had ended up buying the remnants of what had been thrown out in the early 80s.
That was the New York Public Library stuff Michael got.
So Michael starts digging through this stuff.
And I came down.
I spent the better part of the day digging with him.
This is at his place.
At his place.
So we pull out this Italian algebra book.
It's printed in Fort Missoula, Montana.
And, except on the cover, it's got, like, the fascist, the fassies, the axes and the bundled sticks.
Right.
It's on the back of the dime.
And is dated, you know, XXII, which is fascist dating from here Mussolini took power.
It's like 1943, right?
He took power in 21.
And...
Missoula, Montana, 1943, an Italian algebra book.
And we sat there and, like, literally kind of, what is this?
You know, it made no sense.
And we kind of idly speculated, and then we continued.
Ten days later, I'm reading the New York Times.
And there's an article in the New York Times about how Italian-Americans are now beginning to protest.
in the same way that the Japanese Americans protested about how they were treated during World War II, about how good American citizens who just happened to be of Italian heritage were interned and treated badly in America.
We interned some Italians?
Yeah, yeah.
We had Italian concentration camps.
And, you know, they all wanted to get a settlement, just like the Japanese had gotten.
Very interesting.
I can see where you're going with this.
They had a picture of one of the chief internment camps, which was in Fort Missoula, Montana.
And I called Michael up, I said, Michael, do you see the story in the Times?
And he said, no.
And he got the Times.
And he said, yeah, I said, what about it?
And I said, well, that's regardless.
And he goes, oh, okay.
Yeah, he said, well, okay, yeah, well, so what?
And I said, well, so what?
The goddamn cover has the Fassies and axes on it and Mussolini's date.
And these people are claiming they were good Americans.
You know, if they were good Americans, they would have had 1943.
Yeah, they wouldn't have the comparable swastika.
Yeah, exactly.
So he says, Jesus Christ.
So he calls up the Times.
And he says, guess what I've got.
Guess what I've got.
And so the Times says, you know, well, where can we see it?
And Michael says, New York Public Library, they've got a microfilm.
So they send somebody over to the New York Public Library.
They call Michael back in two hours.
They say, we don't know what you're talking about.
They've got the book, they've got the Italian thing, but they don't have those covers you're talking about.
Of course, they didn't film the covers.
They didn't film the covers.
And Michael said, well, I've got the originals right here.
You see?
And they said, well, you know, bring them down.
That's the story.
And Michael said, I want to write a letter to the Times.
They said, you bring them down, and we can prove it.
Did the Times reprint it?
Yeah, the Times ran the story.
Did they?
They ran the letter.
But they were saying to Michael— Who wrote the letter?
Michael.
So it was a Zinman letter.
A Zinman letter.
I'll do a search for it.
I'll do a Lexnex search for it.
It's a Zinman letter.
And, of course, without the—what the Times printer said was, we don't—you know, we can't accept microfilm
I think even what was there... The Times says this?
Well, I've got a story for you when you're done with this.
Inside, there were more... The covers weren't there, but there was some kind of fascistic emblems on the inside, so they could see what Michael was talking about.
But the Times further said, we're not comfortable with microfilm.
We run your letter, there'll be a big stink in the Italian-American community, they'll be all pissed off, we want to see hard copies.
The Times said this.
The Times said this to Michael.
Now...
The Times, I think, accepts microfilm as evidence.
But in this case, they're going to make a political decision here.
They're running something they think is going to piss off the Italian-American community.
How many million Italians in New York?
They want hard copy.
Jean Ashton, when I was at the Grollier dinner, either this year or the year before, and we're chatting, and she's telling me about medium rare, which I think is cute.
And then she says, you know, we're talking about preservation, we're talking about the...
I forget how we went, but I'm writing all this down in my notebook.
And she said, you know, from—she forgets the years, but I have since— They wanted—they were going to run a letter.
They thought it was going to be controversial.
The reporter wanted hard copy.
He wanted to see— Yeah, but their own policy, it's kind of hypocritical, isn't it, where their own policy says microfilm is good?
That is kind of hypocritical, but, you know, you could say it's also just a good reporter being sure of the story.
So the story did finally run.
Oh, they ran Michael's letter.
They ran the letter.
Oh, yeah.
And Michael, being Michael, jumped in his pickup truck and drove down to the Times building and walked in with it.
So anyway, I mean, ultimately, we basically just took the decision that we didn't care.
We were going to do this.
And we also had a friend on the board.
We had a number of friends on the board, actually, but one specific friend on the board gave us the home addresses of the other trustees.
So a copy of the Zinman broadside went to all those people.
And suddenly, Singer's story came out, Michael's broadside hit, and suddenly we got some action.
I did an interview with Robert Darnton a couple months ago.
He's one of the trustees.
He's a terrific interviewer, great guy.
And then I said to him,
And this is before I'd been talking to Michael about this.
And he said, there's one thing I told Paul.
I will not tolerate guillotining.
I said, where is he getting this jargon, you know?
He must have been getting the—and so I understand they've come up now with a policy.
So I gather.
I mean, you know— And LeClaire says it's not going to happen again.
Right, right.
And we'll see.
I'm going to call Paul.
I mean, Paul—
Paul and I have met a number of occasions.
I met with Paul immediately after the story came out.
Is the thing smoothed over between you and he?
I like to think things weren't particularly rough between him and me.
I explained to him why we did it.
He's not going to get upset.
When that story hit, I wrote him a letter.
I said, look, this is why we did this.
I'd be happy to talk to you about it.
I'd be happy to tell you from my point of view, as somebody in the trade, and as somebody who's the trustee of a large research library,
Why the artifact is important.
And I met and had a very cultural conversation with him, and I don't think that he was aware that this was going on.
I mean, he hadn't been in charge that long.
Well, it happened, it started back in the 70s.
Yeah, it was a huge organization.
I mean, in a way, these things are self-fulfilling prophecies.
This is funded by federal funds.
They got the money to do the microfilming, the money's sitting there, you know.
And I think he genuinely wanted it to stop.
By the time I talked to him, he genuinely wanted it to stop for two reasons.
I mean, one, I'd like to think it's because he didn't think it should happen.
Two, was it become an extraordinary... The ink is bad, yeah.
It's very bad ink.
But I felt like that's, in the end, what it took.
And that's what it took to bring it to his attention, for that matter.
You know, to really kind of cut through.
Nothing happens in a vacuum.
Yeah.
Never has, never will.
So, I mean, Michael and I very consciously planned our little, um, our rig.
Well, and it worked.
Congratulations.
I mean, I'm writing about it.
You know, I'm not going to go into the, because I've got a lot of instances of discarded.
That's it.
Because they were not any longer.
And that their whole...
that they were very proud, trusted proud that they were not any library.
They were the New York Public Library, and that they should have been holding themselves to a higher standard.
Well, they just announced last week that this woman, Patricia Batten, she's getting a National Medal of whatever, and she's honoring her effort for leading the charge to preserve on Michael's phone.
Uh-huh.
You know, her preservation thing is a microfilm thing.
Well, I don't have it, as I said.
Yeah, but my point is, I wonder if these people know that we do preserve an essential step in this process of the dilatine.
Well, they do throw things away.
But as I said, I mean, in this case, the artifacts were not destroyed.
I mean, they were perfectly intact.
They were just sliced?
They were just sliced.
They had been stuck back in the bindings.
They're all at AAS now.
I mean, this is the stacks down here.
Oh.
But this is, as I said, the bulk of the shelving is out at the warehouse, that's where.
But we've got half a mile between these two buildings.
So that's the downtown part of the operation.
But, you know, even if it meant just sticking the stuff in a box, you still have it.
I don't think they wanted to be bothered, though.
Yeah, I know they didn't want to be bothered.
And David has as much as told me that, too.
The cost involved in giving somebody something is more than throwing it away.
Yeah, well, I also said to them,
You know, even if they didn't want to keep it, I mean, that seemed to be the other point.
Right.
That AAS is sitting there saying, you know, we'll come take it away.
And, you know, they had to at least get it to the loading dock.
You know, they had to at least get it to the loading dock.
And if they got it to the loading dock, they could as easily load it into an AAS truck as anybody else's truck.
I think that's...
I like David.
He's a hell of a nice guy.
And this is a very embarrassing thing for them.
The David stamp.
Yeah.
Well, David and I have been, you know, disagreeing on this from then to now, and nothing's changed.
I mean, I think David's a nice guy, and I think he's, you know, basically a great professional, but, you know.
He was wrong on this.
But Bill was part of this, too, you know?
Want some altruids?
No, no.
I think I've got it.